[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Halfway through our journey,
and the wisdom from two sacred
peaks has been unlocked, the
dawning of a sense of freedom.
But thinking we know,
have figured it out,
or have gotten
someplace sometimes
breeds a false
sense of security.
Anna's head injury reminds
us of the constant vigilance
needed here and in life.
But Jeff is not
listening to the warning,
something all too
familiar to his wife, Jen.
>> The only way to
tune in is to receive.
Someone has to become empty.
And if you are too full,
too arrogant, too proud,
too full of your ideas, and
ideologies, and stories,
you can never tune in.
So to tune in, one has to
be empty, empty of thought,
empty of stories,
empty of fear, empty.
When we come to any place
of power, or vortex,
or any place to receive or to
learn, one has to turn empty,
not to agree or disagree,
like or dislike.
Drop all judgment.
Drop all expectation.
Drop all opinion.
Just turn to presence, an empty
presence, absolutely receptive.
You turn to emptiness right
now, and what you will find
is attunement with it all
right now in this very moment.
This is not a journey
to feel better.
Do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
>> My whole backstory
of my life is--
and it's not a sad story.
I don't-- I'm not
looking for any sympathy.
But you know, I was adopted.
I had a father, a
stepfather, you know?
I've been in a long
lineage of noncommittment.
So even for me, I feel like a
ghost or a wanderer in life.
You know, I could have
gone a whole lifetime
without committing.
And I met Jennifer.
And I realized
when we first met,
it was probably, like a lot of
people, a toxic relationship.
You know, you meet somebody in
a bar, and you grow together.
And since then, we've grown,
and we've quit drinking,
quit doing all that other stuff.
So in a way, I guess for
me, the relationship is--
I don't want it just to
be having a person here
to listen to me.
I want to share my experiences
positively with Jennifer.
But the definition of
relationship is it is tough.
Because I'm not even sure myself
if I'm strong inside myself
with this relationship.
>> Today we ride to Badrinath
and the Temple of Narayana,
the sustainer.
This is the ongoing
practice and diligence
to keep an eagle eye on what
even the wisest have had
trouble with, the attachment
to the ego and a sense
of humility, which is perfect
as the road to Badrinath
starts off so beautiful but that
virtually disappears into dirt,
gravel, and rocky-edged cliffs.
[HORN HONKING]
>> So I was driving,
wasn't going fast.
The road came down to a--
pretty much a one-way.
A truck was coming.
And I hesitated.
Should I go?
Should I stay?
Boom.
I'm going to wear my
helmet from now on.
I was wearing it, thank God.
Because I head-butted a rock.
>> Really?
>> Oh yeah-- bam.
Sliced my hand a little
bit, but not a big deal.
Protection.
I got to re-chant my
mantra slow and steady.
Is there room in
the car for her?
>> Yeah.
Yeah, smart.
>> Mario hitting his head on a
rock hasn't deterred Jeff from
riding without a helmet,
although has opted to ride
on the back of the bike
due to the rocky roads.
But Fred, he pushes through.
It comes as little
surprise though that he
might struggle on these roads.
But his courage
and spirit always
get him right back on the bike.
>> Are you OK?
>> I'm OK.
It seems like up here,
I'm not thinking so much
about the future.
I'm just-- you know, I'm
practicing just being here,
present.
And I'm not thinking back
about the past that much.
Because I know that's--
either way, it's
not being present.
This thing about being in India
and being in these mountains,
it's--
I'm just-- I guess I'm
beginning to get a touch of what
difference it makes.
>> I have one
jacket for the cold.
>> At least we got here before
we got drenched again, huh?
>> I'm learning to stop
now, not falling over.
>> It's awesome, awesome.
>> This is really the
valley of the Gods, huh?
>> Look at that.
>> Stunning.
>> Just ahead of the rain.
>> That is crazy right there.
>> That is absolutely awesome.
>> The sacred Himalayas are the
spiritual heritage of humanity.
These great mountains,
since time immemorial,
have always stood for something
transcendental, something
beyond the mundane.
And these sacred
peaks that we have
been going to, or
pilgrimaging to,
stand for that, not in a
religious manner, you see.
They're not in a
religious journey.
Because religions are based
on fragmentation, separation.
We are on a journey
to realize what
it means to be truly human,
what it means to be truly alive.
And these places offer
up an opportunity,
because there is immense power.
All the yogis who came here were
not because of some religion,
see?
They came here to be
in an environment,
to be in an
energetic space which
was conducive to going
deeper within oneself,
to realizing who I am truly.
Who am I beyond all
the content of my mind?
Because only the truth of
who I am will set me free.
So all of the yogis and
the masters who came here
was to discover self,
to realize self.
And then people have experiences
like this in a place.
That place starts to reverberate
with that energy, you see?
So if you go to a bar, and
it's been a bar for 20 years,
and now it's not a bar--
but when you go in there,
into the bar, in that
space, you can still
feel the vibrational energy.
So when these masters,
or these beings,
have been meditating in these
mountains, in these spots,
the place starts to
reverberate at that frequency.
Because we have been
going through and doing
the practices.
So the riders could sense it the
moment we entered this valley.
And that is not to do with
any particular religion.
The oldest religion is separate.
We are here as a
Hindu religion-- no.
We are here as human beings.
And we are here to tap into
the heritage of humanity,
the spiritual
heritage of humanity.
And these great Himalayas,
these great mountains,
and these sacred spots
offer that opportunity.
But not everybody who
comes here will feel that.
Definitely a lot-- a lot
of people will come here.
They will ring the bell
and do the little rituals
on the surface, go around
the motion, you see,
just go through the
motion and be gone.
But if you want to really
tap into the profound energy
of the space, you
have to go subtler.
Only the beings who come with a
specific state of consciousness
and beings who are ready to
be empty will be able to tune
to that reverberation.
And their being will start to
reverberate at that frequency.
>> I have never seen
anyone pet a cow.
>> I love cows.
>> That cow was in bliss.
>> The cows love you too.
>> They're so sweet.
There will be no more
meat in my house, ever.
Like, I'm already vegetarian,
but Jeff will get them no more.
>> No more, not after that.
>> No.
>> He seemed pretty
convinced too,
like after seeing that and
talking to Anand for a moment,
you know?
>> Every being has the right
to live, wants to live.
And why would you want
to ingest your body
with something dead, something
which has struggled to live?
All you're eating,
really, is misery.
You're eating misery.
That struggle, that
moment of that struggle,
and what's happened in
that struggle, the brain
of the animal, this triggers
release of hormones which gets
absorbed in the muscles.
And you're eating that.
Why would you do that to
yourself, or to the animal,
or to the-- ?
>> Transferring to the people.
>> And then you can justify
the protein or the--
I have never, in my life, ever
had even a bite of anything
that died.
And I think I'm in pretty
good shape for the protein.
Climb any mountain.
>> You need iron.
You need iron.
>> Climb any mountain
in flip flops.
>> Today Anand gives us some
time to explore Badrinath,
to slow down and absorb
the town, and the temple,
and these great Himalayas
in whatever way we like
and on our own.
>> When we first met, we would
fit together on the couch
so well, you know?
Our hearts were beating.
And our heads, our
minds was as one.
And we ventured into having
these beautiful children,
you know?
They're totally killer.
And I realized that over
time, I'd come home from work,
and I'd take the kids
to give her her space.
And we'd have a good time.
But I realized that I wasn't
making those special date
nights for her.
I was letting her
have her space alone.
But I was with the kids and
forgetting that opportunity
to really spend with her.
You know, 12 years
later it's like, dude,
where's the date night?
Shit.
You know, she plans them all.
>> I'm going to come back for
some of these for souvenirs.
So I'm happy that we got to
go out to dinner by ourselves,
like a date night.
And now we're walking
around looking
at this beautiful temple.
And I'm really happy.
>> When feeling this Temple of
Badrinath and any of the sacred
peaks, it's really interesting
to know the energy behind it.
For example, when they were
first creating Badrinath Temple
and erecting the statue
of Narayana, which is also
called Vishnu,
many powerful yogis
gathered, pouring
energy into it for days.
They would meditate, chant, and
even wake it up in the morning.
They'd bathe it, feed it, and
continue to do so to this day.
In essence, they're seeing
and feeling it as alive,
as having spirit and energy.
>> I feel a transition.
I feel a shift happening in
myself and in everyone here
that whatever it is
that we came here
with that we wanted to let
go of is going to be gone.
My father was very abusive
emotionally and mentally.
And from that, there's that
feeling of not being enough.
Because I couldn't
achieve that love.
The last few years, I've really
been working through that.
But that self-doubt
has still been there.
And that's one of the
reasons why I'm here
is to work through
that, rise above.
>> A true life has no war
in it, no violence in it,
no lack in it, no fear in it.
Otherwise we are only living
with the mask, you see--
the mask, the facade,
afraid to be found out.
So we have to keep
the facade up somehow.
And the moment we
are threatened,
somebody threatens
that facade, we judge.
We get together to
pull that person down.
So my master used to
always say, if you
want to be liked by everyone,
you have to die today.
Because still, you are alive.
There will be people--
and you speak the truth,
more people will dislike
you than like you.
>> My baby.
>> Today we head past Badrinath
to the last town before Tibet,
Mana.
From there we hike into
the Himalayas to a point
where it's 60 miles of pure
Himalayan peaks just flooding
you with their presence.
>> Well, on this trip, I never
expected that we would be
taking pictures of each other.
This is us by the bridge.
This is us by the waterfall.
You know, we both
have to become whole,
each member, so we
can come together
and share the experiences.
So I feel closer to
her, because we never
have enough time to be close.
I know there's still a hard
path that we both have to take,
but it's getting there.
>> This concept of relationship,
a lot of time we enter a ship,
and it becomes a
dead entity, you see?
Now we are on a
ship, and that's it.
And somehow this ship
will take us somewhere.
And then we cease to
relate to each other.
We are on a ship,
and we are kind
of just, what's your problem?
Why aren't you fine?
I have-- I give you
everything, right?
That's a common
thing in the ship.
On the ship, when there is
waiters to serve you food,
and the weather is fine,
and it's going from point A
to point B, isn't it?
And in between, people
forget to relate, to connect,
to be present, to listen,
to just observe each other.
And the distance keeps
increasing in time.
So I always say, don't
get on a ship, you know?
Stay on the shore.
In other words, this
ship, it's like it's
based on the concept or an
idea that somehow you will
get somewhere because of this.
And that's where
the misery begins.
You start to think that the
other person is supposed
to make you happy, you know?
And that's such a fallacy.
It's an atrocity.
And as you said, you
have to come to whole.
When two wholes relate to
each other, there is beauty.
But when you are conflicted
inside, for a momentary time,
for some time, your attention
shifts on the other,
and you feel a
pleasurable experience.
But then the familiarity--
it becomes familiar.
It becomes part
of your who am I.
When it becomes the moment,
it becomes part of your who
am I. The attention
shifts back to the misery,
and what's missing,
and the split part.
So if we stay long enough here
without a practice-- you see?
If we stay long enough-- like
a lot of people in the village,
they stay long enough here,
it becomes part of their
who am I. Do you understand?
And then it's just
a mundane life.
There is nothing
transformational occurring.
They're not connected
to the source.
There is no practice.
It's just going
through the emotion,
going through the emotion.
As I always say, the
only way of relating
is evolutionary, where the
primary awareness is how can I
serve you in your evolution,
not to make you feel better,
to put a Band-Aid on
your little thing.
OK, let's go shopping,
or let's do this.
But how can we evolve?
How can we transform?
How can we expand?
How can we set each other free?
Not how can we set--
hold each other hostage, but
how can we set each other free?
And when you start
coming from that space,
there is a whole
different way of relating.
Because the moment you point
finger one at somebody else,
the three are pointing at you.
And that's why I think one of
the biggest violent acts we do
is blame.
The moment there is--
because you are with me.
I was happy a moment before.
And now I am unhappy.
And you are in front of me.
So you are the problem.
Isn't it?
But when we really
turn honest, you
begin to realize that the only
being who can set you free
is you.
I mean, you really
begin to realize that.
Then the person in front of
you is just a reflection.
And you want to serve.
How can I set you--
how can I help you
in your journey?
Because when are in touch with
that source, you're so full.
You're so full of life,
there's nothing missing.
So now let's go on our ways.
And then we'll take a couple
of hours just by ourselves.
Go wherever you want to be
silent, but not down, up.
You can be here or anywhere
for a couple of hours.
Just be with yourself, yeah?
No together.
No two people together,
separate, alone, by oneself.
Yeah?
>> We went our separate
ways in silence.
But he came to find me.
And I was just not quite
ready to talk to him yet.
I still thinking things over.
And I finally told
him, well, what
I've been thinking about is
that if you're so different here
with these other people and
you can't be like that with me
in your family, then
something's wrong.
Then maybe I need
to set him free
if that's who he really is and
he's not happy where he is.
>> Some of the worst part
is, sometimes, I feel like,
am I the only one that has
to change here, you know?
It's a two-way road.
>> So I was trying to just
not think about me, me, me.
I was trying to think about
maybe what's best for him.
>> I'll miss these vast
Himalayan mountains,
wisdom pouring down.
One may have great insights,
but without diligent practice,
it can all be lost.
Is Jen truly setting Jeff free?
Or is it just not
worth the effort
to try and change someone?
Maybe it's too late
or too much work
to alter a faulty foundation
for their relationship.
>> Without trust,
there is no love.
There is only insecurity.
Most people, in their love,
they're only insecure in it.
So they're not really loving,
they're only insecure.
They think they love.
The parameter of
love is freedom.
The true love will set you free.
It won't bring insecurities,
jealousies, and all of that.
Trust is the key.
Otherwise we'll destroy
the people we love.
And it's not trusting the
other person, trusting self,
that you are capable of
transcending no matter what is
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know as Anand says,
you've got to go through
the fire.
And he put me through
the fire today.
And you're damn straight
I'll never forget it.
>> I think that was
my angriest moment.
Like everything that I've
experienced just all from life
just all came crashing.
[CHANTING]